<h2>DEBIAN DEBOOTSTRAP</h2>

<!-- ################################# -->

<h3>1. First steps</h3>

<p>1.1 Download Debian Live CD - https://cdimage.debian.org/cdimage</p>

<p>1.2 Verify sums</p>

<p>https://www.debian.org/CD/verify</p>

<p>1.2 Set BIOS to first boot from USB stick and maintain enable Secure Boot (if booting from the USB is failing, turn off Secure Boot in the BIOS). Put a admin password in your BIOS e do not use the same for your disk encryption. Strong password was at least 20 characters. Do not reuse passwords. Disable usb at BIOS startup after installation. You could disable fast boot to avoid issues with linux.</p>

<p>1.3 If you uses Windows, you could write the image with Balena Etcher, or in Android with EtchDroid. In Linux you could use this command:</p>

<p><pre>$ dd if=path/to/debian.iso of=/dev/sdX bs=4M conv=fsync oflag=direct status=progress</pre></p>

<p>To find your devices:</p>

<pre>$ lsblk</pre>

<p>1.4 Boot a Debian Live CD.</p>

<p>1.5 Connect to internet and open terminal. Live CD has sudo enabled by default, but this is the commands to set sudo privileges:</p>

<pre>
$ su -l
# adduser USERNAME sudo
# exit
</pre>

<p>To take effect, log out of the desktop environment and log in again. Examples, from command line:</p>

<pre>
$ xfce4-session-logout --logout
$ gnome-session-quit --no-prompt
$ lxqt-leave --logout
</pre>

<p>1.6 Find your devices and figure out which device you will be using system on. Make sure you will use the correct name for your label. You could use these commands:</p>

<pre>
$ lsblk
$ lsblk -f
$ sudo fdisk -l
$ sudo parted -l
$ sudo file -sL /dev/sd*
</pre>

<p>If your want to know the serial id:</p>

<pre>
$ sudo blkid
$ lsblk --nodeps -no name,serial,type,tran
</pre>

<p>1.7 Probably everything will be on <code>/dev/sda</code> or <code>/dev/nvme0n</code>. Remember to sanitize your disk, it may take hours.</p>

<p>1.8 Do a update to be sure you’re updated for software.</p>

<pre>$ sudo apt update && sudo apt upgrade</pre> 

<p>1.9 You can modify <code>sources.list</code> if you wish to change the list of mirrors.</p>

https://wiki.debian.org/SourcesList</br>
https://backports.debian.org/Instructions/</br>

<p>Example to overwrite sources.list:</p>

<pre>
$ echo '

deb http://deb.debian.org/debian/ bookworm main contrib non-free-firmware
deb-src http://deb.debian.org/debian/ bookworm main contrib non-free-firmware

deb http://deb.debian.org/debian/ bookworm-updates main contrib non-free-firmware
deb-src http://deb.debian.org/debian/ bookworm-updates main contrib non-free-firmware

deb http://security.debian.org/debian-security/ bookworm-security main contrib non-free-firmware
deb-src http://security.debian.org/debian-security/ bookworm-security main contrib non-free-firmware

deb http://deb.debian.org/debian bookworm-backports main contrib non-free
deb-src http://deb.debian.org/debian bookworm-backports main contrib non-free

' | sudo tee /etc/apt/sources.list
</pre>

<p>Example to just append to sources.list:</p>

<pre>
$ echo '

deb http://deb.debian.org/debian bookworm-backports main contrib non-free
deb-src http://deb.debian.org/debian bookworm-backports main contrib non-free

' | sudo tee -a /etc/apt/sources.list
</pre>

<p>Then update:</p>

<pre>
$ sudo apt update -y && sudo apt upgrade -y
</pre>

<p>To install from backports, examples:</p>

<pre>
$ sudo apt install package/bookworm-backports
$ sudo apt install papirus-icon-theme/bookworm-backports
$ sudo apt install samba/bookworm-backports
$ sudo apt install zabbix-agent/bookworm-backports
$ sudo apt install freedombox/bookworm-backports
$ sudo apt install gomuks/bookworm-backports
</pre>

<p>*Take care with dependencies.</p>

<p>1.9 Make sure you have these packages installed</p>

<pre>
$ sudo apt install cryptsetup lvm2 debootstrap
</pre>

<!-- ################################# -->

<h3>2. Manual Partitioning</h3>

<p>2.1 You need to determine minimum requirements for your system.</p>

<p>2.2 EFI System Partition (ESP): Microsoft recommends you set aside 100 MiB for Windows. Officially, it is recommended to make it at least 300 MiB.</p>

<p>2.3 Boot: Ubuntu's default size is 466MiB (500MB). Note that boot partition is not always necessary. A separate /boot partition is only required if your boot loader is not capable of accessing the /boot directory that resides in /. For example, if the boot loader does not support that file system or if your / is on a stacked block device (e.g. software RAID, a encrypted volume or a LVM volume) and the boot loader does not have drivers for it.</p>

<p>2.4 Root: Ubuntu recommends at least 5GB, but in practice that is far too small. At least 20GB makes a safer size.</p>

<p>2.5 Swap: In theory, if you use hibernation, you could use up to twice your RAM. If you wish to use hibernation, and you might be working with huge files and systems (e.g. virtual machines, video editing and more all at the same time), be safe and choose twice your RAM. To use hibernation (a.k.a suspend to disk) it is advised to create the swap partition at the size of RAM. If you intend to never use hibernation or hybrid suspend, you can use a swap file (https://wiki.debian.org/Swap).</p>

<p>2.6 Home: This is entirely a personal choice.</p>

<p>2.7 Partitioning layout</p>

<h4>LVM on LUKS Partitioning ("Full-disk encryption")</h4>

<pre>
+------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
|     ESP    |                LUKS2 Encryption  /dev/sda2               |
+------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| EFI System |                 LVM2 Group  /dev/host-vg                 |
|            +------------------+-------------------+-------------------+
|            |Logical volume 1  | Logical volume 2  | Logical volume 3  |
|            |                  |                   |                   |
| /dev/sda1  |/dev/host-vg/root | /dev/host-vg/swap | /dev/host-vg/home |
|            |                  |                   |                   |
| 100MiB     | 10GiB            | 4GiB              | 16GiB             |
|            |                  |                   |                   |
| fat32      | ext4             | ext4              | swap              |
| /boot/efi  | /                | /home             | [SWAP]            |
+------------+------------------+-------------------+-------------------+
</pre>

<p>2.8 Information: HDD, SSD and NVMe</p>

https://wiki.debian.org/SSDOptimization</br>
https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Advanced_Format</br>

<p>2.9 Disk size</p>

<h4>Disk size, a comparison between GB and GiB:</h4>

<p>∙ Debian installer (SI prefix base-10): 2.0 GB swap 10.0 GB ext4</p>
<p>∙ GNOME Disks (SI prefix base-10): 2.0 GB swap 10.0 GB ext4</p>
<p>∙ GParted (IEC prefix base-2): 1.86 GiB swap 9.31 GiB ext4</p>

<sub>*Note that "Gigabyte" always was 1024 x 1024 x 1024 bytes (normal notion).</br>
But drive manufacturers define gigabyte as 1000 x 1000 x 1000 bytes.</br>
In brief, 1000 GB = 931.32 "GB"</sub>

<p><b>Example in FAT32</b></p>

<p>• For EFI System partition</br>
Since 100MiB = 104.8576MB and FAT32 EFI partition at the beginning of the disk consumes 1MiB.</br>
Thus, 105.8576MB or ~105.858MB is displayed as 100.00MiB in Disk Manager</br></p>

<p><b>Example in EXT2/3/4</b></p>

<p>• For Boot partition</br>
Since 500MiB = 524.288MB and space between the partitions consumes 1MiB.</br>
Thus, 525.288MB is displayed as 500.00MiB in Disk Manager</br></p>

<p>• For Root partition</br>
For 10GB EXT4 Drive</br>
It is displayed as 10.00GiB</br></p>

<p>• For Root partition</br>
For 10GB EXT4 Drive</br>
It is displayed as 100.00GiB</br></p>

<p><b>Example in LVM2</b></p>

<p>∙ Volume group:</br>
In it b|B is bytes, m|M is MiB and g|G is GiB.</br>
When the user want to round by 1000 - he can always go with 'byte' units i.e. -l 1000000b</br></p>

<p>∙ Subvolume, logical volume:</br></p>

<p><b>Example in NTFS</b></p>

<p>For Perfect 100GB Drive.</br>
100GB Drive = 100 X 1024 = 102400MB (Displayed as 99.99GB)</br>
Perfect 100GB Drive = 100 X 1024 + 10 x 8 = 102480MB (Displayed as 100.00GB)</br></p>

<sub>*Note that if you declare a partition to be 20480 MB, that's exactly 20.00 "GB" (GiB),</br>
but the resulting disk capacity will be 19.99 GB because difference in the size of one block</br>
or "allocation unit" or first block on the partition, to hold the boot sector of the disk.</sub>

<p>2.9 Login to the root live environment command line and find your disk targets.</p>

<pre>
$ lsblk
</pre>

<p>2.3 Creating a Partition Table:</p>

<pre>
$ sudo su 
# fdisk /dev/sdX
</pre>

<pre>
Welcome to fdisk (util-linux 2.34).
Changes will remain in memory only, until you decide to write them.
Be careful before using the write command.

Command (m for help):
</pre>

<p>Here is the complete command list:</p>

<pre>
Command (m for help): m

Help:

 GPT
   M   enter protective/hybrid MBR

  Generic
   d   delete a partition
   F   list free unpartitioned space
   l   list known partition types
   n   add a new partition
   p   print the partition table
   t   change a partition type
   v   verify the partition table
   i   print information about a partition

  Misc
   m   print this menu
   x   extra functionality (experts only)

  Script
   I   load disk layout from sfdisk script file
   O   dump disk layout to sfdisk script file

  Save & Exit
   w   write table to disk and exit
   q   quit without saving changes

  Create a new label
   g   create a new empty GPT partition table
   G   create a new empty SGI (IRIX) partition table
   o   create a new empty MBR (DOS) partition table
   s   create a new empty Sun partition table
</pre>

<p><em>*Press CTRL+C to back one instance</em></p>

2.4 Create partitions:</br>

<h4>Use GPT to boot the disk in UEFI mode. Enter g to create a new empty GPT partition table:</h4>

<pre>
Enter g to create a new empty GPT partition table: g

Created a new GPT disklabel (GUID: XXXXXXXX-XXXX-XXXX-XXXX-XXXXXXXXXXXXX)
</pre>

<h4>The changes you make to the partition table won’t take effect until you write them with the <code>w</code> command.</h4>

<h4>If you want to delete a partition, use the <code>d</code> command.</h4>

<h4>If you want to list partitions, use the <code>l</code> command.</h4>

<h4>You can exit the fdisk dialogue without saving the changes using the <code>q</code> command.</h4>

<h4>GUID Partition Table (GPT) is a partitioning scheme that is part of the Unified Extensible Firmware Interface (UEFI) specification </h4>

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Partition type</th>
<th>FDISK Type Code</th>
<th>GDISK Type Hex Code</th>
<th>Partition Type GUIDs</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>EFI System</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>ef00</td>
<td>C12A7328-F81F-11D2-BA4B-00A0C93EC93B</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>BIOS Boot Partition (for GRUB)</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>ef02</td>
<td>21686148-6449-6E6F-744E-656564454649</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Linux Root</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>8304</td>
<td>4F68BCE3-E8CD-4DB1-96E7-FBCAF984B709</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Linux Home</td>
<td>41</td>
<td>8302</td>
<td>933AC7E1-2EB4-4F13-B844-0E14E2AEF915</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Linux Swap</td>
<td>19</td>
<td>8200</td>
<td>0657FD6D-A4AB-43C4-84E5-0933C84B4F4F</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Linux Filesystem</td>
<td>20</td>
<td>8300</td>
<td>0FC63DAF-8483-4772-8E79-3D69D8477DE4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Linux LUKS</td>
<td>*cryptsetup<br>*dm-crypt</td>
<td>8309</td>
<td>CA7D7CCB-63ED-4C53-861C-1742536059CC</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Linux LVM</td>
<td>43</td>
<td>8e00</td>
<td>E6D6D379-F507-44C2-A23C-238F2A3DF928</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Linux RAID</td>
<td></td>
<td>fd00</td>
<td>A19D880F-05FC-4D3B-A006-743F0F84911E</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Windows basic data</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>0700</td>
<td>EBD0A0A2-B9E5-4433-87C0-68B6B72699C7</td>
</tr>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<!-- ################################# -->

2.5 Create a 100M partition with the EFI label, type 1.</br>

Run the <code>n</code> command to create a new partition:</br>

<pre>
Command (m for help): n
</pre>

UEFI systems typically need an EFI system partition, BIOS systems that are partitioned with GPT require a BIOS boot partition if GRUB is used as the bootloader. You’ll be prompted to enter the partition number, hit <code>“Enter”</code> to use the default value (1), EFI system:</br>

<pre>
Partition number (1-128, default 1):
</pre>

Next, the command will ask you to specify the first sector. Generally it is always recommended to use the default values for the first value. Hit <code>“Enter”</code> to use the default value (2048):</br>

<pre>
First sector (2048-100000000, default 2048):
</pre>

On the next prompt, you’ll need to enter the last sector. You can use an absolute value for the last sector or relative value to the start sector, using the <code>+</code> symbol following by the partition size. The size can be specified in kibibytes (<code>K</code>), mebibytes (<code>M</code>), gibibytes (<code>G</code>), tebibytes (<code>T</code>), or pebibytes (<code>P</code>).

Press <code>l</code> to get a list of partition types and then press <code>t</code> to change the type. </br>

<pre>
Last sector, +/-sectors or +/-size{K,M,G,T,P} (2048-500118158, default 500118158):
</pre>

Enter <code>+100M</code> to set the partition size to 100 MiB:

<pre>
Last sector, +/-sectors or +/-size{K,M,G,T,P} (2048-500118158, default 500118158): +100M

Created a new partition 1 of type 'Linux filesystem' and of size 100 MiB.
</pre>

Once done creating partitions, use the <code>p</code> command to display the new partition table and w to write.

<!-- ################################# -->

2.8 Create 4G partition with the swap label, type 19.</br>

Run the <code>n</code> command to create a new partition:</br>

<pre>
Command (m for help): n
</pre>

<pre>
Partition number (1-128, default 1):19
</pre>

Next, the command will ask you to specify the first sector, hit <code>“Enter”</code> to use the default value:</br>

<pre>
First sector (54732800-100000000, default 54732800):
</pre>

On the next prompt, you’ll need to enter the last sector. 

<pre>
Last sector, +/-sectors or +/-size{K,M,G,T,P} (2048-500118158, default 500118158):
</pre>

Enter <code>+4G</code> to set the partition size to 4 GiB:

<pre>
(...)Created a new partition 19 of type 'Linux filesystem' and of size 4 GiB.
</pre>

Once done creating partitions, use the <code>p</code> command to display the new partition table and w to write.

<!-- ################################# -->

2.6 Create a 10G partition with the root, type 23.</br>

Run the <code>n</code> command to create a new partition:</br>

<pre>
Command (m for help): n
</pre>

<pre>
Partition number (1-128, default 1):23
</pre>

Next, the command will ask you to specify the first sector, hit <code>“Enter”</code> to use the default value:</br>

<pre>
First sector (206848-100000000, default 206848):
</pre>

On the next prompt, you’ll need to enter the last sector. 

<pre>
Last sector, +/-sectors or +/-size{K,M,G,T,P} (2048-500118158, default 500118158):
</pre>

Enter <code>+10G</code> to set the partition size to 10 GiB (officially it is recommended 20G):

<pre>
(...)Created a new partition 23 of type 'Linux filesystem' and of size 10 GiB.
</pre>

Once done creating partitions, use the <code>p</code> command to display the new partition table and w to write.

<!-- ################################# -->

2.7 Create a 16G or take up the remaining partition with the home label, type 41.</br>

Run the <code>n</code> command to create a new partition:</br>

<pre>
Command (m for help): n
</pre>

<pre>
Partition number (1-128, default 1):41
</pre>

Next, the command will ask you to specify the first sector, hit <code>“Enter”</code> to use the default value:</br>

<pre>
First sector (21178368-100000000, default 21178368):
</pre>

On the next prompt, you’ll need to enter the last sector.You can make a 16G partition or use all the remaining space.

<pre>
Last sector, +/-sectors or +/-size{K,M,G,T,P} (2048-500118158, default 500118158): +16G
</pre>

Enter <code>+16G</code> to set the partition size to 16 GiB:

<pre>
(...)Created a new partition 41 of type 'Linux filesystem' and of size 16 GiB.
</pre>

Once done creating partitions, use the <code>p</code> command to display the new partition table and w to write. Press <code>q</code> to exit.

<!-- ################################# -->

2.9 Configure LUKS partitions. If not, install cryptsetup utility and recheck your disk targets. </br>

<pre>
$ sudo apt install cryptsetup
$ lsblk

NAME    SIZE
sdX                   
├─sdX1  100M
├─sdX2  4G
├─sdX3  10G
└─sdX4  16G
</pre>

*Use the same password for each encrypted partition (root, home and swap) to easy login in your system. Choose a memorable, long and high entropy password. 70 bit of entropy is a good choice </br>

<!-- ################################# -->

2.10 Make the encrypted root file system.</br>

Make the encrypted swap file system.</br>

<pre>
$ sudo cryptsetup --verify-passphrase --verbose --type luks2 luksFormat /dev/sdX2
 
WARNING!
========
This will overwrite data on /dev/sdX2 irrevocably.
 
Are you sure? (Type uppercase yes): YES
Enter LUKS passphrase: 
Verify passphrase: 
Command successful.
</pre>

Make the encrypted root file system.</br>

<pre>
$ sudo cryptsetup --verify-passphrase --verbose --type luks2 luksFormat /dev/sdX2
</pre> 
 
 Make the encrypted home file system.</br>

<pre>
$ sudo cryptsetup --verify-passphrase --verbose --type luks2 luksFormat /dev/sdX2
</pre> 

<!-- ################################# -->


2.11 Create a mapping


mkfs.vfat /dev/sda1

mkswap /dev/sda2

mkfs.ext4 /dev/sda3


Create a mapping ("root") for the /dev/sdX2:</br>

<pre>
$ sudo cryptsetup luksOpen /dev/sdX2 root
Enter passphrase for /dev/sdX2:
</pre>

To see the status for the mapping:</br>

<pre>
$ sudo cryptsetup -v status root
</pre>

Format root LUKS partition. Create a filesystem i.e. format filesystem, enter:</br>

<pre>
$ sudo mkfs.ext4 /dev/mapper/root
</pre>

<!-- ############ -->

Create a mapping ("root") for the /dev/sdX2:</br>

<pre>
$ sudo cryptsetup luksOpen /dev/sdX2 root
Enter passphrase for /dev/sdX2:
</pre>

To see the status for the mapping:</br>

<pre>
$ sudo cryptsetup -v status root
</pre>

Format root LUKS partition. Create a filesystem i.e. format filesystem, enter:</br>

<pre>
$ sudo mkfs.ext4 /dev/mapper/root
</pre>

<!-- ############ -->

Create a mapping ("home") for the /dev/sdX2:</br>

<pre>
$ sudo cryptsetup luksOpen /dev/sdX2 root
Enter passphrase for /dev/sdX2:
</pre>

To see the status for the mapping:</br>

<pre>
$ sudo cryptsetup -v status root
</pre>

Format root LUKS partition. Create a filesystem i.e. format filesystem, enter:</br>

<pre>
$ sudo mkfs.ext4 /dev/mapper/root
</pre>


<!-- ################################# -->



<pre>
$ sudo mount /dev/mapper/root /mnt
</pre>




<!-- ################################# -->



<!-- ################################# -->


*Use the same password for each encrypted partition to easy login in your system.</br>

cryptsetup -y -v --type luks2 luksFormat /dev/sdX2</br>




A 32G (or whatever you feel size it should be) swap partition with the Linux swap label, type 19.</br>
</br>
A third partition taking up the remaining space with a Linux label, default type.</br>
</br>
Write the disk with w.</br>
</br>
Make the file systems.</br>
</br>
mkfs.vfat /dev/sda1.</br>
</br>
mkswap /dev/sda2</br>
</br>
mkfs.ext4 /dev/sda3 (or whatever other disk type you like)</br>
</br>
3. System Instalation</br>
</br>
Mount this new environment</br>
</br>
mount /dev/sda3 /mnt</br>
</br>
mkdir -p /mnt/boot/efi</br>
</br>
mount /dev/sda1 /mnt/boot/efi</br>
</br>





<!-- ################################# -->


<h3>4. Installation</h3></br>
</br>
Install debootstrap</br>
</br>
apt install debootstrap</br>
</br>
Run debootstrap (here, we’re assuming we’re installing Ubuntu 21.04, Hirsute Hippo).</br>
</br>
debootstrap hirsute /mnt</br>
</br>
Copy the apt sources list.</br>
</br>
cp /etc/apt/sources.list /mnt/etc/apt</br>
</br>
Edit the apt sources list on /mnt and delete the CD-rom entry. Add universe, too, if you’re running Ubuntu.</br>
</br>
vi /mnt/etc/apt/sources.list</br>
</br>
If the list is too short because you’re on Debian or something, visit the list for Debian here.</br>
</br>
Mount the pseudo-filesystems and networking</br>
</br>
for dir in sys dev proc; do mount --rbind /$dir /mnt/$dir && mount --make-rslave /mnt/$dir ; done</br>
</br>
cp /etc/resolv.conf /mnt/etc/</br>
</br>
Time to chroot.</br>
</br>
chroot /mnt /bin/bash</br>
</br>
<h3>4. Getting the System Running</h3></br>
</br>
Update apt. NOTE: Make sure you have the right distro installed. Change ‘bullseye’ to ‘sid’ in /etc/apt/sources.list, for </br>example.
apt update</br>
</br>
If you used any file system but ext4, install appropriate packages.</br>
</br>
xfs = apt install xfsprogs</br>
btrfs = apt install btrfs-progs</br>
</br>
Reconfigure the region.</br>
</br>
apt install locales</br>
`dpkg-reconfigure locales</br>
</br>
Pick our region from the list that comes up. For the US, this is: en_US.UTF-8 UTF-8.</br>
</br>
Set the root password.</br>
</br>
passwd</br>
</br>
Install a kernel plus important software plus microcode. Change intel-microcode for amd64-microcode if you use an AMD </br>processor.
</br>
DEBIAN: apt install linux-image-amd64 sudo ntp network-manager vim intel-microcode</br>
UBUNTU: apt install linux-image-generic sudo network-manager vim intel-microcode build-essential gdm3 gnome-shell-common </br>gnome-terminal human-theme
</br>
Set up fstab</br>
</br>
cp /proc/mounts /etc/fstab</br>
vi /etc/fstab</br>
</br>
Remove all the lines in /etc/fstab that refer to proc, sys, devtmpfs and pts.</br>
</br>
Replace references to /dev/sdXX, /dev/nvmeXnYpZ, etc. with their respective UUID, which can be found by running blkid. [NOTE: </br>PARTUUID is nice, but doesn’t work with Btrfs.] 
</br>
Remove the quotation marks.</br>
</br>
Example: UUID=ffe9419a-500c-9c49-816f-41aebf92b55e</br>
</br>
Change tmpfs's location to /tmp.</br>
</br>
</br>
</br>
</br>
</h3>5. Installing Grub</h3></br>
</br>
</br>
Set the hostname.</br>
</br>
vi /etc/hostname</br>
</br>
Type the hostname you choose for the box. For this example, we’ll use and type:</br>
</br>
debstrap</br>
</br>
Next,</br>
</br>
vi /etc/hosts</br>
</br>
Add a new line at the end. Type:</br>
</br>
127.0.0.1(TAB)localhost</br>
::1(TAB)(TAB)localhost</br>
127.0.1.1(TAB)debstrap.localdomain(TAB)debstrap</br>
</br>
Set the timezone.</br>
</br>
dpkg-reconfigure tzdata</br>
</br>
Add your main user. VERY IMPORTANT FOR UBUNTU!</br>
</br>
useradd -mG sudo aaron</br>
passwd aaron</br>
</br>
</h3>6. Installing Grub</h3></br>
</br>
Install via apt first.</br>
</br>
apt install grub-efi-amd64</br>
</br>
Install grub now.</br>
</br>
grub-install /dev/sda</br>
</br>
Make sure grub has a source list.</br>
</br>
update-grub</br>
</br>
Enable networking on boot. systemctl enable NetworkManager</br>
</br>
Restart</br>
</br>
</br>
sudo bash -c "echo 'vm.swappiness = 10' >> /etc/sysctl.conf"</br>


Backup

fdisk 
luksHeaderBackup <device> - Backup LUKS device header and keyslots


<!-- ################################# -->


<h3>LAYOUT 1 - LVM on LUKS Partitioning ("Full-disk encryption")</h3>

<pre>
+------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
|     ESP    |                LUKS2 Encryption  /dev/sda2               |
|------------+----------------------------------------------------------|
| EFI System |                 LVM2 Group  /dev/host-vg                 |
|            |------------------+-------------------+-------------------|
|            |Logical volume 1  | Logical volume 2  | Logical volume 3  |
|            |                  |                   |                   |
| /dev/sda1  |/dev/host-vg/root | /dev/host-vg/home | /dev/host-vg/swap |
|            |                  |                   |                   |
| 100MiB     | 10GiB            | 16GiB             | 4GiB              |
| fat32      | ext4             | ext4              | swap              |
| /boot/efi  | /                | /home             | [SWAP]            |
+------------+------------------+-------------------+-------------------+
</pre>

<h3>LAYOUT 2 - ENCRYPTED LVM ON LUKS WITH ENCRYPTED BOOT REMOVABLE MEDIUM (USB STICK)</h3>

<pre>
+---------------------------+  +-----------------------------------------------------------+
|     ESP    |     BOOT     |  |                 LUKS2 Encryption  /dev/sda1               |
|------------+--------------|  |-----------------------------------------------------------|
| EFI System | Boot         |  |    LVM2 Group /dev/host-vg <a href="#footnote-1">[1]</a><a href="#footnote-2">[2]</a><a href="#footnote-3">[3]</a>          |
|            | encrypted    |  |-------------------+-------------------+-------------------|
|            |              |  | Logical volume 1  | Logical volume 2  | Logical volume 3  |
|            |              |  |                   |                   |                   |
| /dev/sdb1  | /dev/sdb2    |  | /dev/host-vg/root | /dev/host-vg/home | /dev/host-vg/swap |
|            |              |  |                   |                   |                   |
| 100MiB     | 500MiB       |  | 10GiB             | 16GiB             | 4GiB              |
| fat32      | ext2         |  | ext4              | ext4              | swap              |
| /boot/efi  | /boot        |  | /                 | /home             | [SWAP]            |
+------------+--------------+  +-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+
</pre>

<br id="footnote-1">[1] To work with LVM, you could use KDE Partition Manager.</br>
<br id="footnote-2">[2] Debian Live CD has bugs with LVM.</br>
<br id="footnote-3">[3] It's possible to create a nuke-password.</br>

<h3>LAYOUT 3 - ENCRYPTED LVM ON LUKS WITH ENCRYPTED BOOT AND KEYFILE IN REMOVABLE MEDIUM (USB STICK)</h3>

<pre>
+---------------------------+  +-----------------------------------------------------------+
|     ESP    |     BOOT     |  |                 LUKS2 Encryption  /dev/sda1               |
|------------+--------------|  |-----------------------------------------------------------|
| EFI System | Boot         |  |                  LVM2 Group /dev/host-vg                  |
|            | encrypted    |  |-------------------+-------------------+-------------------|
|            | + keyfile    |  | Logical volume 1  | Logical volume 2  | Logical volume 3  |
|            |              |  |                   |                   |                   |
| /dev/sdb1  | /dev/sdb2    |  | /dev/host-vg/root | /dev/host-vg/home | /dev/host-vg/swap |
|            |              |  |                   |                   |                   |
| 100MiB     | 500MiB       |  | 10GiB             | 16GiB             | 4GiB              |
| fat32      | ext2         |  | ext4              | ext4              | swap              |
| /boot/efi  | /boot        |  | /                 | /home             | [SWAP]            |
+------------+--------------+  +-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+
</pre>


<p>References</p>
• https://wiki.debian.org/Debootstrap</br>
• https://wiki.ubuntu.com/DebootstrapChroot</br>
• https://wiki.debian.org/DebianInstall</br>
• https://www.debian.org/releases/stable/amd64/</br>
• https://help.ubuntu.com/community/ManualFullSystemEncryption/OverviewPartitionPreparation</br>
• https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/dm-crypt/Encrypting_an_entire_system</br>
• https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Partitioning</br>
• https://gist.github.com/varqox/42e213b6b2dde2b636ef</br>
• https://github.com/AlexisMtzGasca/Debootstrap</br>
• Cryptsetup - https://gitlab.com/cryptsetup/cryptsetup</br>
• Dm-crypt - https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Dm-crypt</br>
• Fstab - https://manpages.debian.org/bookworm/mount/fstab.5.en.html</br>
• Crypttab - https://manpages.debian.org/bookworm/cryptsetup/crypttab.5.en.html</br>
