<h2>DEBIAN DEBOOTSTRAP</h2>

References</br>
https://wiki.debian.org/Debootstrap</br>
https://wiki.debian.org/DebianInstall</br>
https://www.debian.org/releases/stable/amd64/</br>
https://help.ubuntu.com/community/ManualFullSystemEncryption/OverviewPartitionPreparation</br>
https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/dm-crypt/Encrypting_an_entire_system</br>
https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Partitioning</br>
https://gist.github.com/varqox/42e213b6b2dde2b636ef</br>

<h3>1. First steps</h3>

1.1 Download Debian Live CD - https://cdimage.debian.org/cdimage/

1.2 Set BIOS to first boot from USB stick and maintain enable Secure Boot (if booting from the USB is failing, ensure Secure Boot is turned off in the BIOS). Put a admin password in your BIOS e do not use the same for your disk encryption. Strong password was at least 20 characters. Do not reuse passwords.

1.3 If you uses Windows, you could write the image with Balena Etcher, or in Android with EtchDroid. In Linux you could use this command:

<pre>$ dd if=path/to/debian.iso of=/dev/sdx bs=4M conv=fsync oflag=direct status=progress</pre>

1.4 Boot a Debian Live CD.

1.5 Connect to internet and open terminal. Live CD has sudo enabled by default, but this is the commands to set sudo privileges:

<pre>
$ su -l
# adduser USERNAME sudo
# exit
</pre>

To take effect, log out of the desktop environment and log in again. Examples, from command line:

<pre>
$ xfce4-session-logout --logout
$ gnome-session-quit --no-prompt
$ lxqt-leave --logout
</pre>

1.6 Find your drives and figure out which device you will be using system on. Make sure you will use the correct name for your label. You could use these commands:

<pre>
$ lsblk
$ lsblk -f
$ sudo fdisk -l
$ sudo parted -l
$ sudo file -sL /dev/sd*
</pre>

If your want to know the serial id:
<pre>
$ sudo blkid
$ lsblk --nodeps -no name,serial,type,tran
</pre>

1.7 Probably everything will be on <code>/dev/sda</code> or <code>/dev/nvme0n</code>. Remember to sanitize your disk, it may take hours.

1.8 Do a update to be sure you’re updated for software.

<pre>$ sudo apt update && sudo apt upgrade</pre> 

1.9 You can modify <code>sources.list</code> if you wish to change the list of mirrors.

https://wiki.debian.org/SourcesList</br>
https://backports.debian.org/Instructions/</br>

Example to overwrite sources.list:
<pre>
$ echo '

deb http://deb.debian.org/debian/ bookworm main contrib non-free-firmware
deb-src http://deb.debian.org/debian/ bookworm main contrib non-free-firmware

deb http://deb.debian.org/debian/ bookworm-updates main contrib non-free-firmware
deb-src http://deb.debian.org/debian/ bookworm-updates main contrib non-free-firmware

deb http://security.debian.org/debian-security/ bookworm-security main contrib non-free-firmware
deb-src http://security.debian.org/debian-security/ bookworm-security main contrib non-free-firmware

deb http://deb.debian.org/debian bookworm-backports main contrib non-free
deb-src http://deb.debian.org/debian bookworm-backports main contrib non-free

' | sudo tee /etc/apt/sources.list
</pre>

Example to just append to sources.list:
<pre>
$ echo '

deb http://deb.debian.org/debian bookworm-backports main contrib non-free
deb-src http://deb.debian.org/debian bookworm-backports main contrib non-free

' | sudo tee -a /etc/apt/sources.list
</pre>

Then update:
<pre>$ sudo apt update -y && sudo apt upgrade -y</pre>

To install from backports:
<pre>$ sudo apt install package/bookworm-backports</pre>

*Take care with dependencies.

<h3>2. Manual Partitioning</h3>

2.1 You need to determine your minimum requirements for your system.

2.2 EFI System Partition (ESP): create 100MB like Windows, you won't fill it up.

2.3 Boot: Ubuntu's default size is 466MiB (500MB). Note that boot partition is not always necessary. A separate /boot partition is only required if your boot loader is not capable of accessing the /boot directory that resides in /. For example, if the boot loader does not support that file system or if your / is on a stacked block device (e.g. software RAID, a encrypted volume or a LVM volume) and the boot loader does not have drivers for it.

2.4 Root: Ubuntu recommends at least 5GB, but in practice that is far too small. At least 20GB makes a safer size.

2.5 Swap: In theory, if you use hibernation, you could use up to twice your RAM. If you wish to use hibernation, and you might be working with huge files and systems (e.g. virtual machines, video editing and more all at the same time), be safe and choose twice your RAM. To use hibernation (a.k.a suspend to disk) it is advised to create the swap partition at the size of RAM. If you intend to never use hibernation or hybrid suspend, you can use a swap file (https://wiki.debian.org/Swap).

2.6 Home: This is entirely a personal choice.

2.7 Partitioning scenarios

Some examples

<h3>CASE 1 - LUKS ON A PARTITION ("Full-disk encryption")</h3>

<pre>
+------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------|
|    ESP     |        LUKS2      |       LUKS2       |       LUKS2       |
|------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------|
| EFI System | Volume 1          | Volume 2          | Volume 3          |
|            |                   |                   |                   |
| /dev/sda1  |/dev/sda2          | /dev/sda3         | /dev/sda4         |
|            |                   |                   |                   |
| 100MiB     | 10GiB             | 16GiB             | 4GiB              |
| fat32      | ext4              | ext4              | swap              |
| /boot/efi  | | /               | /home             | [SWAP]            |
|            |                   |                   |                   |
+------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+
</pre>

<h3>CASE 2 - ENCRYPTED LVM ON LUKS WITH UNENCRYPTED BOOT REMOVABLE MEDIUM ("Lvm on luks")</h3>

<pre>
+---------------------------+  +-----------------------------------------------------------+
|     ESP    |     BOOT     |  |                 LUKS2 Encryption  /dev/sda1               |
|------------+--------------|  |-----------------------------------------------------------|
| EFI System | Boot         |  |    LVM2 Group<a href="#footnote-1">[1]</a><a href="#footnote-2">[2]</a> /dev/host-vg           |
|            | unencrypted  |  |-------------------+-------------------+-------------------|
|            |              |  | Logical volume 1  | Logical volume 2  | Logical volume 3  |
|            |              |  |                   |                   |                   |
| /dev/sdb1  | /dev/sdb2    |  | /dev/host-vg/root | /dev/host-vg/home | /dev/host-vg/swap |
|            |              |  |                   |                   |                   |
| 100MiB     | 500MiB       |  | 10GiB             | 16GiB             | 4GiB              |
| fat32      | ext2         |  | ext4              | ext4              | swap              |
| /boot/efi  | /boot        |  | /                 | /home             | [SWAP]            |
|            |              |  |                   |                   |                   |
+------------+--------------+  +-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+
</pre>

<br id="footnote-1">[1] To work with LVM, use KDE Partition Manager.</br>
<br id="footnote-2">[2] Live CD has bugs with LVM.</br>

2.8 HDD Vs. SSD Vs. NVMe

https://wiki.debian.org/SSDOptimization</br>
https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Advanced_Format</br>

2.9 Disk size

<h4>Disk size, a quick comparison between GB and GiB:</h4>

<p>∙ Debian installer (SI prefix base-10): 2.0 GB swap 10.0 GB ext4</p>
<p>∙ GNOME Disks (SI prefix base-10): 2.0 GB swap 10.0 GB ext4</p>
<p>∙ GParted (IEC prefix base-2): 1.86 GiB swap 9.31 GiB ext4</p>

Note: "Gigabyte" always was 1024 x 1024 x 1024 bytes (normal notion).</br>
But drive manufacturers define gigabyte as 1000 x 1000 x 1000 bytes.</br>
In brief 1000 GB = 931.32 GiB</br>

<b>In FAT32</b></br>

• For EFI System partition
Since 100MiB = 104.8576MB and FAT32 EFI partition at the beginning of the disk consumes 1MiB.</br>
Thus, 105.8576MB or ~105.858MB is displayed as 100.00MiB in Disk Manager</br>

<b>In EXT4</b></br>

• For Boot partition
Since 500MiB = 524.288MB and space between the partitions consumes 1MiB.</br>
Thus, 525.288MB is displayed as 500.00MiB in Disk Manager</br>

• For Root partition
For 10GB EXT4 Drive</br>
It is displayed as 100.00GiB</br>

• For Home partition

<b>In LVM2</b></br>
∙ Volume group:
In it b|B is bytes, m|M is MiB and g|G is GiB.
When the user want to round by 1000 - he can always go with 'byte' units i.e. -l 1000000b
∙ Subvolume, logical volume:


<b>In NTFS</b></br>
For Perfect 100GB Drive.</br>
100GB Drive = 100 X 1024 = 102400MB (Displayed as 99.99GB)</br>
Perfect 100GB Drive = 100 X 1024 + 10 x 8 = 102480MB (Displayed as 100.00GB)</br>

<p>*If you declare a partition to be 20480 MB, that's exactly 20.00 GB (or GiB, for sticklers), but the resulting disk capacity will be 19.99 GB because difference in the size of one block or "allocation unit" or first block on the partition, to hold the boot sector of the disk.</p>

2.9 Login to the root live environment command line and find your disk targets.

<pre>
$ lsblk
</pre>

<!-- ################################# -->

<h4>• CASE 1 - LUKS ON A PARTITION ("Full-disk encryption")</h4>

2.3 Creating Partition Table:

<pre>
$ sudo su 
# fdisk /dev/sdX

Welcome to fdisk (util-linux 2.34).
Changes will remain in memory only, until you decide to write them.
Be careful before using the write command.

Command (m for help):
</pre>

Use GPT to boot the disk in UEFI mode. Enter g to create a new empty GPT partition table:

<pre>
Enter g to create a new empty GPT partition table: g

Created a new GPT disklabel (GUID: XXXXXXXX-XXXX-XXXX-XXXX-XXXXXXXXXXXXX)
</pre>

<h4>The changes you make to the partition table won’t take effect until you write them with the <code>w</code> command.</h4>
<h4>If you want to delete a partition, use the <code>d</code> command.</h4>
<h4>You can exit the fdisk dialogue without saving the changes using the <code>q</code> command.</h4>

2.4 Create partitions:


<h4>GUID Partition Table (GPT) is a partitioning scheme that is part of the Unified Extensible Firmware Interface (UEFI) specification </h4>

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Partition type</th>
<th>FDISK Type Code</th>
<th>GDISK Type Hex Code</th>
<th>Partition Type GUIDs</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>EFI System</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>ef00</td>
<td>C12A7328-F81F-11D2-BA4B-00A0C93EC93B</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>BIOS Boot Partition (for GRUB)</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>ef02</td>
<td>21686148-6449-6E6F-744E-656564454649</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Linux Root</td>
<td>23</td>
<td>8304</td>
<td>4F68BCE3-E8CD-4DB1-96E7-FBCAF984B709</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Linux Home</td>
<td>41</td>
<td>8302</td>
<td>933AC7E1-2EB4-4F13-B844-0E14E2AEF915</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Linux Swap</td>
<td>19</td>
<td>8200</td>
<td>0657FD6D-A4AB-43C4-84E5-0933C84B4F4F</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Linux Filesystem</td>
<td>20</td>
<td>8300</td>
<td>0FC63DAF-8483-4772-8E79-3D69D8477DE4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Linux LUKS</td>
<td></td>
<td>8309</td>
<td>CA7D7CCB-63ED-4C53-861C-1742536059CC</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Linux LVM</td>
<td>43</td>
<td>8e00</td>
<td>E6D6D379-F507-44C2-A23C-238F2A3DF928</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Windows basic data</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>0700</td>
<td>EBD0A0A2-B9E5-4433-87C0-68B6B72699C7</td>
</tr>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

2.5 Create a 100M partition with the EFI label, type 1.

Run the <code>n</code> command to create a new partition:

<pre>
Command (m for help): n
</pre>

UEFI systems typically need an EFI system partition, BIOS systems that are partitioned with GPT require a BIOS boot partition if GRUB is used as the bootloader. You’ll be prompted to enter the partition number, hit <code>“Enter”</code> to use the default value (1), EFI system:

<pre>
Partition number (1-128, default 1):
</pre>

Next, the command will ask you to specify the first sector. Generally it is always recommended to use the default values for the first value. Hit <code>“Enter”</code> to use the default value (2048):

<pre>
First sector (2048-500118158, default 2048):
</pre>

On the next prompt, you’ll need to enter the last sector. You can use an absolute value for the last sector or relative value to the start sector, using the <code>+</code> symbol following by the partition size. The size can be specified in kibibytes (<code>K</code>), mebibytes (<code>M</code>), gibibytes (<code>G</code>), tebibytes (<code>T</code>), or pebibytes (<code>P</code>).

Press <code>l</code> to get a list of partition types and then press <code>t</code> to change the type. 

<pre>
Last sector, +/-sectors or +/-size{K,M,G,T,P} (2048-500118158, default 500118158): l
</pre>

Enter <code>+100M</code> to set the partition size to 100 MiB:

<pre>
Last sector, +/-sectors or +/-size{K,M,G,T,P} (2048-500118158, default 500118158): +100M

Created a new partition 1 of type 'Linux filesystem' and of size 100 MiB.
</pre>

Once done creating partitions, use the <code>p</code> command to display the new partition table:

<pre>
Command (m for help): p
</pre>


2.6 Create a 10G partition with the root, type 23.

Run the <code>n</code> command to create a new partition:

<pre>
Command (m for help): n
</pre>


2.7 Create a 16G partition with the home label, type 41.

Run the <code>n</code> command to create a new partition:

<pre>
Command (m for help): n
</pre>


2.8 Create a 100M partition with the swap label, type 19.

Run the <code>n</code> command to create a new partition:

<pre>
Command (m for help): n
</pre>





2.9 Configure LUKS partitions. Install cryptsetup utility and recheck your disk targets. 

<pre>
$ sudo apt install cryptsetup
$ lsblk

NAME    SIZE
sdX                   
├─sdX1  100M
├─sdX2  10G
├─sdX3  16G
└─sdX4  4G
</pre>

*Use the same password for each encrypted partition (root, home and swap) to easy login in your system. Consult EFF Foundation site to know how to create a strong password. 

Make the encrypted root file system.

<pre>
$ sudo cryptsetup -y -v --type luks2 luksFormat /dev/sdX2

WARNING!
========
This will overwrite data on /dev/xvdc irrevocably.
 
Are you sure? (Type uppercase yes): YES
Enter LUKS passphrase: 
Verify passphrase: 
Command successful.
</pre>

Create a mapping ("root") for the /dev/sdX2:

<pre>
$ sudo cryptsetup luksOpen /dev/sdX2 root

Enter passphrase for /dev/sdX2:
</pre>

To see the status for the mapping:

<pre>
$ sudo cryptsetup -v status root
</pre>

Format LUKS partition. Create a filesystem i.e. format filesystem, enter:

<pre>
$ sudo mkfs.ext4 /dev/mapper/root
</pre>


Make the encrypted swap file system






<pre>
$ sudo mount /dev/mapper/root /mnt
</pre>


A 32G (or whatever you feel size it should be) swap partition with the Linux swap label, type 19.

A third partition taking up the remaining space with a Linux label, default type.

Write the disk with w.

Make the file systems.

mkfs.vfat /dev/sda1.

mkswap /dev/sda2

mkfs.ext4 /dev/sda3 (or whatever other disk type you like)

<!-- ################################# -->

<h3>• CASE 2 - ENCRYPTED LVM ON LUKS WITH UNENCRYPTED BOOT REMOVABLE MEDIUM ("Lvm on luks")</h3>



<!-- ################################# -->


*Use the same password for each encrypted partition to easy login in your system.

cryptsetup -y -v --type luks2 luksFormat /dev/sdX2




A 32G (or whatever you feel size it should be) swap partition with the Linux swap label, type 19.

A third partition taking up the remaining space with a Linux label, default type.

Write the disk with w.

Make the file systems.

mkfs.vfat /dev/sda1.

mkswap /dev/sda2

mkfs.ext4 /dev/sda3 (or whatever other disk type you like)

3. System Instalation

Mount this new environment

mount /dev/sda3 /mnt

mkdir -p /mnt/boot/efi

mount /dev/sda1 /mnt/boot/efi

<h3>4. Installation</h3>

Install debootstrap

apt install debootstrap

Run debootstrap (here, we’re assuming we’re installing Ubuntu 21.04, Hirsute Hippo).

debootstrap hirsute /mnt

Copy the apt sources list.

cp /etc/apt/sources.list /mnt/etc/apt

Edit the apt sources list on /mnt and delete the CD-rom entry. Add universe, too, if you’re running Ubuntu.

vi /mnt/etc/apt/sources.list

If the list is too short because you’re on Debian or something, visit the list for Debian here.

Mount the pseudo-filesystems and networking

for dir in sys dev proc; do mount --rbind /$dir /mnt/$dir && mount --make-rslave /mnt/$dir ; done

cp /etc/resolv.conf /mnt/etc/

Time to chroot.

chroot /mnt /bin/bash

<h3>4. Getting the System Running</h3>

Update apt. NOTE: Make sure you have the right distro installed. Change ‘bullseye’ to ‘sid’ in /etc/apt/sources.list, for example.
apt update

If you used any file system but ext4, install appropriate packages.

xfs = apt install xfsprogs
btrfs = apt install btrfs-progs

Reconfigure the region.

apt install locales
`dpkg-reconfigure locales

Pick our region from the list that comes up. For the US, this is: en_US.UTF-8 UTF-8.

Set the root password.

passwd

Install a kernel plus important software plus microcode. Change intel-microcode for amd64-microcode if you use an AMD processor.

DEBIAN: apt install linux-image-amd64 sudo ntp network-manager vim intel-microcode
UBUNTU: apt install linux-image-generic sudo network-manager vim intel-microcode build-essential gdm3 gnome-shell-common gnome-terminal human-theme

Set up fstab

cp /proc/mounts /etc/fstab
vi /etc/fstab

Remove all the lines in /etc/fstab that refer to proc, sys, devtmpfs and pts.

Replace references to /dev/sdXX, /dev/nvmeXnYpZ, etc. with their respective UUID, which can be found by running blkid. [NOTE: PARTUUID is nice, but doesn’t work with Btrfs.] 

Remove the quotation marks.

Example: UUID=ffe9419a-500c-9c49-816f-41aebf92b55e

Change tmpfs's location to /tmp.




</h3>5. Installing Grub</h3>


Set the hostname.

vi /etc/hostname

Type the hostname you choose for the box. For this example, we’ll use and type:

debstrap

Next,

vi /etc/hosts

Add a new line at the end. Type:

127.0.0.1(TAB)localhost
::1(TAB)(TAB)localhost
127.0.1.1(TAB)debstrap.localdomain(TAB)debstrap

Set the timezone.

dpkg-reconfigure tzdata

Add your main user. VERY IMPORTANT FOR UBUNTU!

useradd -mG sudo aaron
passwd aaron

</h3>6. Installing Grub</h3>

Install via apt first.

apt install grub-efi-amd64

Install grub now.

grub-install /dev/sda

Make sure grub has a source list.

update-grub

Enable networking on boot. systemctl enable NetworkManager

Restart


sudo bash -c "echo 'vm.swappiness = 10' >> /etc/sysctl.conf"